update heterogeneity + rep learning sections (#119)
jaybee84/ml-in-rd: content/03.heterogeneity.md

> ### Dealing with complex high-dimensional rare disease data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Manage complex high-dimensional rare disease data
```

The great irony of studying rare diseases with genomics, transcriptomics, or other similar methods that the ability to get an enormous number of measurements from a vanishingly small number of samples, is both the upside and the downfall of these methods.
These 'omic' methods generate highly dimensional data - that is, data with many features - such as all of the mRNA transcripts in a sample. 
However, to make sense of these many features (in other words, to be able to statistically interrogate these measurements), we must have many samples, or observations, which is often not the case in rare disease. 

> This is known as the "curse of dimensionality," and can be a major impediment to the use of data-rich methods in sample-deficient contexts [@doi:10.1038/nrc2294].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is known as the "curse of dimensionality," and can be a major impediment to the use of data-rich statistical methods in sample-deficient contexts [@doi:10.1038/nrc2294].
```

Author: Ah, here I was referring to data generation methods, not statistical methods. Will clarify this

> Even if we momentarily ignore the desire to statistically interrogate our data, simply untangling the many correlated features and interpreting how they relate to the biological question at hand can make the use of highly dimensional rare disease data for discovery daunting. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, simply untangling the many correlated features and interpreting how they relate to the biological question at hand can make the use of highly dimensional rare disease data for discovery daunting. 
```

> Furthermore, rare disease data collection and aggregation methods can further complicate these challenges by introducing more variability into the data at hand. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, rare disease data collection and aggregation methods can further complicate these challenges by introducing technical variability into the data at hand. 
```

#### Dimensionality reduction and representation learning

Dimensionality reduction simply describes any method that 'compresses' information from many features into a smaller number of features.
Methods such as multidimensional scaling (MDS), principal components analysis (PCA), t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE), and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) - which are, themselves, unsupervised machine learning methods - can be used to compress data from many dimensions to a few. [@doi:10.1007/978-3-540-33037-0_14; @doi:10.1098/rsta.2015.0202; @https://lvdmaaten.github.io/publications/papers/JMLR_2008.pdf; @arXiv:1802.03426]
Of note, these techniques are not restricted to 'omic' data - they can also be used in rare disease applications to characterize imaging data [@doi:10.1016/j.media.2020.101660], mass cytometry data [@doi:10.1038/ncomms14825], and others.
The output of these  can then be used to visualize structure in the data, used to define subgroups within data (either biological, or technical, as discussed in the next section), or can be used as part of a machine learning procedure. 

> <!--RJA TODO: Add examples? Not sure how useful-->

Reviewer: I like the idea of adding a few examples. I think it helps crystallize the concepts talked about in the section and gives an audience of new practitioners a good place to start their deep dive.

In fact, dimensionality reduction is the core concept underpinning a class of ML called representation learning (or feature learning).

> Representation learning is the process of learning features from raw data, where a feature is an individual variable.

Reviewer: I am assuming what is implied here is that a feature once learned becomes a singular variable, since features themselves can be an aggregate of few different variables. It would be helpful to clarify that here I think.

Reviewer: @allaway I am not sure this is fully resolved yet.

Using an example from transcriptomics, an unsupervised method such as matrix factorization can be used to extract a low-dimensional representation of the gene-level data, learning features that are a combination of input genes' expression levels [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq503; @doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02021-3].
Low-dimensional representations trained on a collection of transcriptomic data can then be used as input to supervised machine learning methods [@doi:10.1186/s12859-020-3427-8].
Supervised neural networks used in medical imaging studies [@doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.07.014] (reviewed in [@doi:10.1098/rsif.2017.0387]), which are trained to predict labels or classes, are also an example of representation learning.
Learned features in the medical imaging domain may be a series of edges representing a blood vessel formation that discriminates between disease states.
Features learned from transcriptomic data could be coordinated sets of genes involved in a biological process that are descriptive in some way [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-14666-6].

> <!-- RJA NOTE: this next sentence seems to be in conflict with the crux of the intro I wrote to this section - not sure how best to fix this --> 

Reviewer: Discussing representation learning in the context of "Feature-representation-transfer" as done in the "Transfer, multitask, and few-shot learning" section may be helpful in resolving this conflict.

Author: The conflict that I see is basically that this method says it requires a lot of data, whereas the thesis to the section states that dimensionality reduction is one way of resolving issues with overcoming the curse of dimensionality. Not clear to me what you're suggesting and if it solves this conflict - can you provide more details (or, if you have the inclination, take a stab at it)?

Reviewer: I added a couple of sentences to elaborate on my comment above. Let me know if it makes sense or if you were envisioning a different angle to this part :)

Author: Thanks, this change looks great!

> Representation learning tends to be data-intensive; many samples are required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Representation learning tends to be data-intensive (i.e. many samples are required) and thus may seem to aggravate the curse of dimensionality.
But representation learning when applied to learn low dimensional patterns from large datasets and then applying those patterns to smaller but related datasets can be a powerful tool for dimensionality reduction.
In the later sections of this perspective, we will discuss this method of leveraging large datasets to reduce dimensionality in smaller datasets, also known as _feature-representation-transfer_ .
```

Reviewer 2: Agree with @jaybee84 's adds here!

These 'omic' methods generate highly dimensional data - that is, data with many features - such as all of the mRNA transcripts in a sample. 
However, to make sense of these many features (in other words, to be able to statistically interrogate these measurements), we must have many samples, or observations, which is often not the case in rare disease. 
This is known as the "curse of dimensionality," and can be a major impediment in analyzing feature-rich data in sample-deficient contexts [@doi:10.1038/nrc2294].
Additionally, simply untangling the many correlated features and interpreting how they relate to the biological question at hand can make the use of highly dimensional rare disease data for discovery daunting. 
Furthermore, rare disease data collection and aggregation methods can further complicate these challenges by introducing technical variability into the data at hand. 
In this section, we'll discuss strategies to consider that can help mitigate these challenges such as simplifying data by reducing the dimensionality of high-dimensional datasets as well as detecting and correcting technical artifacts. 

> <!-- TODO: If we talk about *feature selection* in addition to feature/representation learning, that might set up model complexity nicely! --> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Addressed further down in revisions.

#### Dimensionality reduction and representation learning

Dimensionality reduction simply describes any method that 'compresses' information from many features into a smaller number of features.
Methods such as multidimensional scaling (MDS), principal components analysis (PCA), t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE), and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) - which are, themselves, unsupervised machine learning methods - can be used to compress data from many dimensions to a few. [@doi:10.1007/978-3-540-33037-0_14; @doi:10.1098/rsta.2015.0202; @https://lvdmaaten.github.io/publications/papers/JMLR_2008.pdf; @arXiv:1802.03426]
Of note, these techniques are not restricted to 'omic' data - they can also be used in rare disease applications to characterize imaging data [@doi:10.1016/j.media.2020.101660], mass cytometry data [@doi:10.1038/ncomms14825], and others.

> The output of these  can then be used to visualize structure in the data, used to define subgroups within data (either biological, or technical, as discussed in the next section), or can be used as part of a machine learning procedure. 

Author: ```suggestion
The output of these can then be used to visualize structure in the data (e.g. [@doi:10.1038/s41467-019-13056-x]), used to define subgroups within data (e.g. [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-15351-4], or can be used for feature selection/extraction during machine learning[@doi:10.1007/978-3-030-03243-2_299-1]. 
```

> <!--RJA TODO: Add examples? Not sure how useful-->

Author: ```suggestion
```

There is sometimes structure in our data that is not related to what we want to study; for example, structure related to batch, sample preparation methodology, or sequencing platform. 
Structure introduced by these variables can obscure the biologically-important information that we seek. 
However, we can leverage dimensionality reduction methods such as PCA, MDS, t-SNE, and UMAP to identify the effect of these variables on the data. 
All of these methods can be used to identify batch effects and other structure in the data, though some (like t-SNE and UMAP) require parameters that can affect the output [@doi:10.23915/distill.00002;@arXiv:1802.03426].
Therefore, obtaining a clear interpretation from these methods requires understanding the underlying approach and parameters.
Another important consideration is discussed by Way, et. al. [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02021-3]: a single dimensionality reduction method alone may not be sufficient to reveal all of the technical or biological heterogeneity; testing multiple methods may result in a more comprehensive portrait of the data.

> <!-- TODO: Refs! -->

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Rare disease data often suffers from artifacts introduced by non-biological phenomena such as batch or assay platform.[@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003, @doi:10.1186/s13023-020-01376-x, @doi:10.1038/s41591-019-0457-8]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rare disease data often suffers from artifacts introduced by non-biological phenomena such as batch or assay platform [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003, @doi:10.1186/s13023-020-01376-x, @doi:10.1038/s41591-019-0457-8].
```
